---
title:  "Homework 1: The Telephone Game"
categories: basics
layout: default
nav_order: 1
---

# Homework 1: The Telephone Game

The Objective of the homework is to make you familiar with the basics of organizaing your ROS codebase, and comfortable with basic ROS communication via topics.

## Objective

Create 4 ROS nodes `node_A`, `node_B`, `node_C`, `node_D` in a single package, and initializae each node with a publisher and a subscriber.

Each node has a publisher on a topic named (outgoing_LETTER) and a subscriber on a topic named (incoming_LETTER).

You need to make sure that `node_A` tells `node_B` a secret message, then `node_B` adds a letter to the message and tells it to `node_C`, then `node_C` does the same and tells it to `node_D`, and then finally `node_D` does the same and tells it back to `node_A`.

You need to know specifically how to name these topics, as the naming scheme will influence the network. Try to dray the network on a paper before implementing it. 

`node_A` will then print the original message and the one it recieves through this telephone line. You should make it so that `node_A` starts this sequnce periodically every 2 seconds.

The sequence of eventes will be prompted by `node_A` publishing to the telephone line, so it is good behaviour to launch `node_B`, `node_C`, and `node_D`, and then run `node_A` to start the events.

Monitor each topic separetly if you want using rqt, or using the CLI commands of rostopic.

Use the rqt introspection (google how to) to plot your nodes and their topics.

## Submission Guideline

1. Create a github or gitlab repository.